.. _relationships:

Relationship of VRS to existing standards
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

Because a primary objective of the GA4GH Variation Representation
Specification (VRS) effort is to unify disparate efforts to represent
biological sequence variation, it is important to describe how this
document relates to previous work in order to avoid “reinventing the
wheel”.

The Variant Call Format (VCF) is the de facto standard for
representing alleles, particularly for use during primary analysis in
high-throughput sequencing pipelines. VCF permits a wide range of
annotations on alleles, such as quality and likelihood scores. VCF is
a file-based format and is exclusively for genomic alleles. In
contrast, the VRS data model abstractly represents Alleles,
Haplotypes, and Genotypes on all sequence types, is independent of
medium, and is well-suited to secondary analyses, allele
interpretation, aggregation, and system-level interoperability.

The HGVS nomenclature recommendations describe how sequence variation
should be presented to human beings. In addition to representing a
wide variety of sequence changes from single residue variation through
large cytogenetic events, HGVS attempts to also encode in strings
notions of biological mechanism (e.g., inversion as a kind of
deletion-insertion event), predicted events (e.g., parentheses for
computing protein sequence), and complex states (e.g., mosaicism). In
practice, HGVS recommendations are difficult to implement fully and
consistently, leading to ambiguity in presentation. In contrast, the
VRS is a formal specification that improves consistency of
representation among computer systems. VRS is currently less
expressive than HGVS for rarer cases of variation, such as cytogenetic
variation or context-based allele representations (e.g., insT written
as dupT when the insertion follows a T). Future versions of the
specification will seek to address limitations while preserving
principles of conceptual clarity and precision.

The Sequence Ontology (SO) is a set of terms and relationships used to
describe the features and attributes of biological sequence. The focus
of the SO has been the annotation of, or placement of ‘meaning’, onto
genomic sequence regions. The VRS effort seeks to use the same
descriptive definitions where possible, and to inform the refinement
of SO.

The Genotype Ontology (GENO) builds on the SO to include richer
modeling of genetic variation at different levels of granularity that
are captured in genotype representations. Unlike the SO which is used
primarily for annotation of genomic features, GENO was developed by
the Monarch Initiative to support semantic data models for integrated
representation of genotypes and genetic variants described in human
and model organism databases. The core of the GENO model decomposes a
genotype specifying sequence variation across an entire genome into
smaller components of variation (e.g. allelic composition at a
particular locus, haplotypes, gene alleles, and specific sequence
alterations). GENO also enables description of biological attributes
of these genetic entities (e.g. zygosity, phase, copy number, parental
origin, genomic position), and their causal relationships with
phenotypes and diseases.

ClinVar is an archive of clinically reported relationships between
variation and phenotypes along with interpretations and supporting
evidence. Data in ClinVar are submitted primarily by diagnostic
labs. ClinVar includes expert reviews and data links to other
clinically-relevant resources at NCBI. The VRS specification is
expected to facilitate data submissions by providing unified
guidelines for data structure and allele normalization.

ClinGen provides a centralized database of genomic and phenotypic data
provided by clinicians, researchers, and patients. It standardizes
clinical annotation and interpretation of genomic variants and
provides evidence-based expert consensus for curated genes and
variants. ClinGen has informed the VRS effort and is committed to
harmonizing and collaborating on the evolution of the VRS
specification to achieve improved data sharing.

HL7 FHIR Genomics, Version 2 Clinical Genomics Implementation Guide,
CDA Genetic Test Report: There are several standards developed under
the HL7 umbrella that include a genomics component. The FHIR Genomics
component was released as part of the overall FHIR specification
(latest is Release 3) based on standardized use cases.  The HL7
Clinical Genomics (CG) Work Group focuses on developing standards for
clinical genomic data and related relevant information within
EHRs. The specifications developed by the CG work group primarily
utilize the HL7 v2 messaging standard and the newer HL7 FHIR (Fast
Healthcare Interoperability Resources) framework.

The SPDI format created to represent alleles in NCBI’s Variation
Services has four components: the sequence identifier, which is
specified with a sequence accession and version; the 0-based interbase
coordinate where the deletion starts; the deleted sequence (or its
length) and the inserted sequence. The Variation Services return the
minimum deleted sequence required to avoid over precision. For
example, a deletion of one G in a run of 4 is specified with deleted
and inserted sequences of GGGG and GGG respectively, avoiding the need
to left or right shift the minimal representation. This reduces
ambiguity, but can lead to long allele descriptions.
